DEVDOCS-2391: Added Contextual Filters (#883)
bigcommerce/dev-docs: docs/api-docs/management-apis/contextual-filters.md

# Contextual Filters

<div class="otp" id="no-index">

### On this page
- [View pre-configured filters](#view-pre-configured-filters)
- [View available filters](#view-available-filters)
- [Configure contextual filters](#configure-contextual-filters)
- [Related resources](#related-resources)

</div>

The [Settings API](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/settings) allows you to manage settings and configurations for BigCommerce hosted stores and headless storefronts. 

> You can use the [contextual filters](insert-link-here) endpoint of the Settings API to programmatically configure a store's Product Filtering feature.

Reviewer: I have a habit of mentioning that our feature "Product Filtering" is often known as "[faceted search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faceted_search)" in the broader e-commerce world. It might be good to do so here as well. 🍹

Additionally, the contextual filters endpoint enables you to merchandize diverse product catalogs by creating a different faceted search configuration for each channel and product category on a store. With this feature, you can configure the product categories for various product lines with a different set of enabled filters, so that shoppers can filter by the most relevant criteria.

This article demonstrates how to use [contextual filters](insert-link-here) to configure filters that appear on a particular category page.

### Limitations

* Currently, the API only supports the default channel with an ID of 1.

> * You can configure contextual filters for Category pages, but not for Brand or Search Results pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can configure contextual filters for Category pages, but not for Brand or Search Results pages at this time.
```

###  Prerequisites

* [A BigCommerce store](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Starting-a-Bigcommerce-Trial).
* API `access_token` with `content modify` scope.
* Knowledge of the [Settings API](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/settings).
* Pro or Enterprise store plan. To upgrade, see [Changing Your Store's Plan](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/How-do-I-upgrade-my-stores-plan).

<div class="HubBlock--callout">
<div class="CalloutBlock--info">
<div class="HubBlock-content">

> ### Note
> * Your store plan must support Product Filtering to use contextual filters. 
> * Product Filtering is available for Pro and Enterprise plans. To upgrade, see [Changing Your Store's Plan](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/How-do-I-upgrade-my-stores-plan).
> * Enterprise accounts have the ability to use [custom fields](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Custom-Fields) as product filters to provide shoppers with additional ways to customize their search. 

</div>
</div>
</div>

> ## View pre-configured filters

Reviewer: Are they "pre-configured", or just "configured"? Even "currently active"?

           "type": "category",
           "items_to_show": 15,
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "display_product_count": true,
           "is_enabled": true
       },
       {
           "id": "U2l6ZQ==",
           "display_name": "Size",
           "type": "product",
           "display_product_count": true,
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "items_to_show": 10,
           "sort_by": "alpha",
           "is_enabled": true
       },
       {
           "id": "cHJpY2U=",
           "display_name": "Price",
           "type": "price",
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "is_enabled": true
       }
       ...
   ],
   "meta": {}
}
```
The global filters returned from completing a `GET` request should match the filters you see in the control panel under **Storefront Filters**. This set of filters is what you currently have configured on your store. 

To access **Storefront Filters** in the control panel, go to **Products** > **Product Filtering**. 

![Products Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-01.png "Products Filters")

## View available filters

> Available filters are the filters you can configure on the global level. To see all available configurable filters, send a `GET` request to [`/v3/settings/search/filters/available`](insert-link-here). To retrieve a list of filters available on a given category, add `category_id` as a query parameter.

Reviewer: This contradicts itself here, because the first sentence says "this is something at the global level", but later on it says "here's how to get it on a category level", which is not the global level.

Perhaps a better sequence is:

1. here's a thing that gives you the available filters in a certain context
2. here's how to get them for the global context
3. here's how to get it for the category context on channel 1
4. (later) here's how to get it for other contexts

Reviewer: I think we can also mention here that the list of available filters is pulled dynamically based on the setup of the catalog. You "create" new available filters by changing your product information in your catalog, such as adding new product options or custom fields. I think it's fine to link to merchant KB for the details of that.

[![Open in Request Runner](https://storage.googleapis.com/bigcommerce-production-dev-center/images/Open-Request-Runner.svg)](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/widgets/widget-template/createwidgettemplate#requestrunner) // replace link

The response will contain all of the filters available for configuration. 

```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "id": "YnJhbmQ=",
            "type": "brand",
            "name": "Brand",
            "product_count": 3
        },
        {
            "id": "cmF0aW5n",
            "type": "rating",
            "name": "Rating",
            "product_count": 1
        },
        {
            "id": "cHJpY2U=",
            "type": "price",
            "name": "Price",
            "price_range_min": 9.95,
            "price_range_max": 225
        },
        ...
    ],
    "meta": {}
}

> ```

Reviewer: 🍹 maybe 1 sentence about "what this means" for this particular response.

e.g. "This means I have a Brand, Rating, and Price filter available for configuration. I can pick from these 3 filters when I am choosing which filters to make active. In reality, there will be more filters."

            },
            "data": [
                {
                    "id": "U2l6ZQ==",
                    "display_name": "Size",
                    "type": "product",
                    "display_product_count": false,
                    "collapsed_by_default": false,
                    "items_to_show": 5,
                    "sort_by": "alpha",
                    "is_enabled": false
                },
                {
                    "id": "cHJpY2U=",
                    "display_name": "Price",
                    "type": "price",
                    "collapsed_by_default": true,
                    "is_enabled": true
                },
                ...
                {
                    "id": "Ym9vbA==",
                    "display_name": "Other",
                    "type": "other",
                    "is_enabled": true,
                    "display_product_count": true,
                    "collapsed_by_default": true,
                    "show_free_shipping_filter": true,
                    "show_is_featured_filter": true,
                    "show_in_stock_filter": true
                }
            ]
        },
    ],
    "meta": {}
}
```

> The order and names of returned filters should match the filters listed under **Category Filters** in the control panel.

Reviewer: I think somewhere we need to mention that you change the order of the filters on the live site by changing the order of the data in the array. Essentially, the "sort order" of filters on the storefront is determined _implicitly_ from the order of the data you send.

> ![Category Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-02.png "Category Filters")

Reviewer 2: In Future will be category + channel filters ... not sure if theres a better name or not.

           "display_product_count": true,
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "items_to_show": 10,
           "sort_by": "alpha",
           "is_enabled": true
       },
       {
           "id": "Ym9vbA==",
           "display_name": "Other",
           "type": "other",
           "is_enabled": true,
           "display_product_count": true,
           "collapsed_by_default": true,
           "show_free_shipping_filter": true,
           "show_is_featured_filter": true,
           "show_in_stock_filter": true
       }
    ],
    "context": {
      "channel_id": 1,
      "category_id": 21
    }
  }
]

```

[![Open in Request Runner](https://storage.googleapis.com/bigcommerce-production-dev-center/images/Open-Request-Runner.svg)](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/widgets/widget-template/createwidgettemplate#requestrunner) // replace link

Refresh your store and open the category you just updated in the control panel. 

![Updated Category Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-03.png "Updated Category Filters")

You can also view the changes on the storefront. 

> ![Updated Category Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-04.png "Updated Category Filters")

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above

You can use the [Contextual Filters](insert-link-here) endpoint of the Settings API to programmatically configure a store's Product Filtering feature, also known as "faceted search".
Additionally, the [Contextual Filters](insert-link-here) endpoint enables you to merchandise diverse product catalogs by creating a different faceted search configuration for each channel and product category on a store. With this feature, you can configure the product categories for various product lines with a different set of enabled filters, so that shoppers can filter by the most relevant criteria.

This article demonstrates how to use [Contextual Filters](insert-link-here) to configure filters that appear on a particular category page.

### Limitations

* Currently, the API only supports the default channel with an ID of 1.
* You can configure contextual filters for Category pages, but not for Brand or Search Results pages at this time.

###  Prerequisites

* [A BigCommerce store](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Starting-a-Bigcommerce-Trial).

> * API `access_token` with `content modify` scope.

Reviewer: Is this the right scope? Settings APIS are supposed to be under the "Modify Store Information" scope.

Author: API `access_token` with `information modify` scope. - Is this correct?

           "items_to_show": 15,
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "display_product_count": true,
           "is_enabled": true
       },
       {
           "id": "U2l6ZQ==",
           "display_name": "Size",
           "type": "product",
           "display_product_count": true,
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "items_to_show": 10,
           "sort_by": "alpha",
           "is_enabled": true
       },
       {
           "id": "cHJpY2U=",
           "display_name": "Price",
           "type": "price",
           "collapsed_by_default": false,
           "is_enabled": true
       }
       ...
   ],
   "meta": {}
}
```

The filters returned from completing this `GET` request should match the filters you see in the control panel under **Storefront Filters**. This set of storefront filters is what you currently have configured on your store. 

To access **Storefront Filters** in the control panel, go to **Products** > **Product Filtering**. 

![Products Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-01.png "Products Filters")

## View available storefront filters

> The catalog setup produces the dynamically pulled list of available storefront filters. You create new available filters by changing the product information in your catalog, such as adding new [product options](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Product-Options-v3) or [custom fields](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Custom-Fields).

Reviewer: > The catalog setup produces the dynamically pulled list of available storefront filters.

This phrasing seemed a little awkward to me. What about:

```suggestion
The list of available storefront filters is derived from the product information in the catalog. You create new available filters by changing the product information in your catalog, such as adding new [product options](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Product-Options-v3) or [custom fields](https://support.bigcommerce.com/s/article/Custom-Fields).
```

X-Auth-Token: {{ACCESS_TOKEN}}
Accept: application/json
```

[![Open in Request Runner](https://storage.googleapis.com/bigcommerce-production-dev-center/images/Open-Request-Runner.svg)](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/widgets/widget-template/createwidgettemplate#requestrunner) // replace link

**Response:**

```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "id": "Y2F0ZWdvcnk=",
            "type": "category",
            "name": "Category",
            "product_count": 7
        },
        {
            "id": "YnJhbmQ=",
            "type": "brand",
            "name": "Brand",
            "product_count": 8
        },
        ...
        {
            "id": "Ym9vbA==",
            "type": "other",
            "name": "Other"
        }
    ],
    "meta": {}
}
```

## View available category-level filters

To retrieve a list of filters available on a given category, include the `category_id` query parameter in your `GET` request to [`/v3/settings/search/filters/available`](insert-link-here). Currently, the Settings API only supports the default `channel_id` of 1.

```http

> GET https://api.bigcommerce.com/stores/{{STORE_HASH}}/v3/settings/search/filters/available?category_id={{CATEGORY_ID}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET https://api.bigcommerce.com/stores/{{STORE_HASH}}/v3/settings/search/filters/available?channel_id=1&category_id={{CATEGORY_ID}}
```

Reviewer: Showing best practice which is to always include channel ID + category ID 👍

        },
        {
            "id": "U2l6ZQ==",
            "type": "product",
            "name": "Size",
            "product_count": 1
        },
        {
            "id": "Ym9vbA==",
            "type": "other",
            "name": "Other"
        }
    ],
    "meta": {}
}
```

The filters returned from completing this `GET` request are the filters available for configuration on the given category. In this example, we have Brand, Rating, Price, Color, Size, and Other filters to pick from when choosing which filters to activate for the Kitchen category. In reality, you will be able to select from more filters.

<div class="HubBlock--callout">
<div class="CalloutBlock--info">
<div class="HubBlock-content">

> ### Categories
> To get a list of your store's categories, send a `GET` request to [`/v3/catalog/categories`](https://developer.bigcommerce.com/api-reference/store-management/catalog/category/getcategories).

</div>
</div>
</div>

## View contextual filters

To see if there are any contextual overrides present on a given category, send a `GET` request to [`/v3/settings/search/filters/contexts`](insert-link-here) specifying the `category_id` query parameter.

```http

> GET https://api.bigcommerce.com/stores/{{STORE_HASH}}/v3/settings/search/filters/contexts?category_id={{CATEGORY_ID}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET https://api.bigcommerce.com/stores/{{STORE_HASH}}/v3/settings/search/filters/contexts?channel_id=1&category_id={{CATEGORY_ID}}
```

                },
                {
                    "id": "cHJpY2U=",
                    "display_name": "Price",
                    "type": "price",
                    "collapsed_by_default": true,
                    "is_enabled": true
                },
                ...
                {
                    "id": "Ym9vbA==",
                    "display_name": "Other",
                    "type": "other",
                    "is_enabled": true,
                    "display_product_count": true,
                    "collapsed_by_default": true,
                    "show_free_shipping_filter": true,
                    "show_is_featured_filter": true,
                    "show_in_stock_filter": true
                }
            ]
        },
    ],
    "meta": {}
}
```
The order and names of returned filters should match the filters listed under **Category Filters** in the control panel. 

![Category Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-02.png "Category Filters")

<div class="HubBlock--callout">
<div class="CalloutBlock--info">
<div class="HubBlock-content">

> ### Note

> > The order of the data you send determines the sort order of the filters on the storefront implicitly. You can change the order of the filters on the live site by changing the order of the array's data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The order of the data you send implicitly determines the sort order of the filters on the storefront. You can change the order of the filters on the live site by changing the order of the array's data.
```

            "price_range_min": 9.95,
            "price_range_max": 225
        },
        {
            "id": "Q29sb3I=",
            "type": "product",
            "name": "Color",
            "product_count": 1
        },
        {
            "id": "U2l6ZQ==",
            "type": "product",
            "name": "Size",
            "product_count": 1
        },
        {
            "id": "Ym9vbA==",
            "type": "other",
            "name": "Other"
        }
    ],
    "meta": {}
}
```

> The filters returned from completing this `GET` request are the filters available for configuration on the given category. In this example, we have Brand, Rating, Price, Color, Size, and Other filters to pick from when choosing which filters to activate for the Kitchen category. In reality, there will be more filters to select from.

Reviewer 4: The filters returned from completing this `GET` request are the filters available for configuration on the given category. In this example, we have Brand, Rating, Price, Color, Size, and Other filters to pick from when choosing which filters to activate for the Kitchen category. In reality, you will be able to select from more filters.

    "meta": {}
}
```
The order and names of returned filters should match the filters listed under **Category Filters** in the control panel. 

![Category Filters](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigcommerce/dev-docs/master/assets/images/contextual-filters-02.png "Category Filters")

<div class="HubBlock--callout">
<div class="CalloutBlock--info">
<div class="HubBlock-content">

> ### Note

> > The order of the data you send determines implicitly the sort order of the filters on the storefront. You can change the order of the filters on the live site by changing the order of the data in the array. 

Reviewer 4: > The order of the data you send determines the sort order of the filters on the storefront implicitly. You can change the order of the filters on the live site by changing the order of the array's data.
